---
layout:
title: "Openness and Government"
---

Governments collect a lot of data about their citizens, their services, and their policies. They use this data to understand if they are accomplishing their goals, and to make better, more informed decisions. When governments allow their citizens access to their data, they not only show citizens the information they have used to make and evaluate decisions, but allow citizens to participate in this process but criticizing government decisions, as well as proposing their own and working on technologies that create solutions. When government makes its decision-making processes, expenditures of organizational structures (sometimes including cash-sources and salaries of individual politicians), and gathered data accessible to its citizens, we call this _transparency_.

Government transparency is closely connected to 'Open Data'. Open Data in governance and policy is a practise whereby public data (data generated, stored on, or about public institutions or matters of public concern) are made available to application developers, civil society bodies, or any interested citizen. The idea is that this can allow citizens to take an initiative in developing both effective criticisms of executive actions (for example, by observing spending reports and budgets) as well as to stimulate efficiency finding innovations. Cities like [Edmonton](https://dashboard.edmonton.ca/) use comprehensive open-data-based reporting to track progress on specific policy goals (Citizen Dashboard, 2011). Opening data not only makes more government more democratic (by increasing the potential of citizens to participate in governance), but even provides the potential for governments to make better decisions.

'Open by default' is not always a clear benefit to people or their democracy. [Lawrence Lessig](http://www.lessig.org/about/), a legal scholar and avid advocate for openness, worried that having too much information, or information of the wrong types, could make citizens view the government more cynically, or be lead by that cynicism to interpret data in more damning ways (Lessig, 2009). Teresa Scassa (2014) points out three distinct types of conflict between conceptions of what is private and what is public concerning Open Data. Firstly, Scassa argues that in some cases, information which is available on ‘the public record’ is not suitable for Open Data style openness. She argues that while certain information (such as databases listing holders of firearms licenses, or donations to political causes) is available to the public in a ledger or through a [Federal Access to Information Request](https://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/tbsf-fsct/350-57-eng.asp) (although other jurisdictions may have their own procedures), typically this is only for a limited number of individuals. The power to map and publicise this information through Open Data, however, raises ethical concerns about exposing people’s information on such a massive scale. Secondly, Scassa points out that while governments are generally circumscribed in their use of sensitive data, private organizations, like corporations, operate with little oversight and disclose their use of information through opaque privacy policies. Whenever information passes through private information systems, users and governments lose the ability to ensure that private information is protected. Finally, Scassa worries that Open Data is another step toward the quantification of society that goes along with big data and mass surveillance.
