The roots of the Open Data Movement can be traced to the Western scientific community of the early twentieth century. In the 1940s sociologist Robert King Merton popularized the idea that scientific research should be made free to all (Data.gov, 2013). For the sake of scientific progress and the idea of “common good”, the public availability of scientific research thus became a popular cause within academia. 

Beyond scientific research, the case for open data grew alongside other “open” movements, such as open-source software in the 1950s and 60s and the implementation of Access to Information Acts by various nations. In the last four decades, the case for open data reached some important milestones, with Ronald Reagan making the United States’ GPS (Global Positioning System) technology available to citizens in 1983. The term open data was first used in 1995 by an American scientific agency (Chignard, 2013), and in 2013 Barack Obama signed an executive order making all federal data public (with some exceptions). 

Since the 1990s the Open Data Movement has gained significant momentum due to advocacy groups and government initiatives. One of the defining moments of open data came in the relief efforts for Hurricane Katrina in 2005, when volunteers gathered and shared valuable information from government websites such as building permits and population estimates (Sollazzo, 2015). Today, the Open Data Movement continues to redefine itself and can be commonly experienced in daily life in the form of Google Maps or Wikipedia. 
