Geothink scholar Teresa Scassa (Scassa, 2014) provides a legal perspective, exploring the implications open data has for privacy and intellectual property law. Open Data and ‘open by default’ policies pose a lot of legal challenges, as data must now be vetted for liability completely and consistently, rather than on case basis, as was the case with Freedom of Information Request. While privacy in law has often been treated as a right to “control” how one’s information has disseminated, this no longer possible when data about citizens can be freely combined and published– often with morally and legally ambiguous results (Scassa, 2013; Scassa, 2015). Whenever data sets are opened, a lot of care must be taken to make any individual information anonymous: a process known as de-identification. This process must be done carefully, to limit the risks of re-identification, which can happen when open data sets are associated with other public data sets, especially those containing demographic information (Cavoukian, 2011).

Information about people is collected not only by following their online activities, but can now be done through internet-enabled sensors and computers that make up the ‘Internet of things’ (IoT). This information, especially when combined with other available data sets can be very useful for analysis, but proper steps must be taken to ensure that identifiable private information about citizens is not released. New data-driven trends like IoT and Big Data challenge our understandings of privacy because people may not be aware about the data being passively collected about them, often have no say in how this data is used, or oversight into whether their identities are protected. The Office of the Privacy Commissioner has explored new informed consent, accountability and oversight mechanisms needed to protect individuals from possible misuses of personal data (OPC, 2016).
